# Module 1 Challenge - Case Study
Carolyn Scheese.
June 11, 2024
Case Study: [Cotiviti](https://www.cotiviti.com/)

## Overview and Origin
Cotiviti, Inc. is a healthcare analytics and retail payment recovery company with 25+ years of experience (1). Cotiviti was created through a merger of Connolly Inc. and iHealth Technologies. Connolly was originally founded in 1979 as a small family business which focused on auditing and helping retailers recover payments. Over time, they saw opportunities to take their experience into the Healthcare industry and they began to work with multiple types of payors; private, industry, and government, including Medicaid (2). iHealth Technologies, Inc. was founded in 2001 and is based in Atlanta, Georgia (3). It focused on helping healthcare organizations with payment solutions. In 2014 Connoly and iHealth merged creating Connoly iHealth. This merger generated an opportunity to leverage each company’s expertise and expand their market footprint. On September 28, 2015, Connolly iHealth Technologies officially became known as Cotiviti and was backed by a major investor and shareholder, Advent International (2,4). With the support, finances, expertise and leadership provided by their major investor, they realized a rapid growth of 80% expanding from $20 million to $200 million in annual revenue. Cotiviti was first listed on the New York Stock Exchange in May 2016 (4). In 2018 Verscend Technologies acquired Cotiviti as part of their portfolio. 

## Business Activities
Cotiviti has become a leader in healthcare data analytics and retail payment solutions. There are two branches of this business, both related to auditing and payment recovery and solutions: Retail and Healthcare. Cotiviti Retail boasts over 40 years’ experience, that they work with 30 of the world’s largest retailers and Fortune 1000 companies, and that their average client relationship is 16.5 years with a 97% satisfaction rating. In 2018-2019 the retail branch recovered more than $1.1 billion dollars in what otherwise would have been lost revenue or excess expenses for these companies (5). 

Cotiviti applies their strong understanding of data analytics and insight of client’s data sets to track and manage inventory, payments, and audits. In applying their data analytics with dashboards for decision making, they have narrowed the timeline between the time a payment is made and detection of any over or under payments, allowing for quicker reconciliation and recovery of incorrect billing and their monies. A big emphasis is put on stopping incorrect billing from the onset known as _Zero Hour Alerts_ with preventive analytics and their dynamic dashboard and prioritized alert system (6). This tool aims to move the window from recovery of missed payments to prevention of mis-payments with real time data analytics and alerts (6).

The Healthcare branch of Cotiviti’s vision and mission is to _“...enable a high-quality and viable healthcare system. Our mission is to improve the healthcare system through our combination of advanced technology, data analytics, and specialized expertise.”_ (7).

>Cotiviti’s healthcare customers include over 180 healthcare payers and all of the top 25 healthcare plans in the United States. Cotiviti uses its expertise with data analysis and payment systems to offer several “solutions” to healthcare organizations to both payment and clinical services including Payment Accuracy, Risk Adjustment, Quality Performance, and Consumer Engagement. 

The healthcare industry is burdened with many regulations which are expensive and pose tremendous risk. For example, if a patient is discharged and then readmitted within a short period of time, the hospital will not receive any reimbursement for those additional costs, resulting in a loss for that hospitalization. Likewise, if a patient gets a certain infection while in the hospital such as a surgical site or central line infection, the payer will commonly not pay for any costs associated with this infection. This is because it is considered a hospital acquired infection and thus preventable, leaving the healthcare facility to shoulder the burden of these additional costs for an infection. The goal of these payment practices is to incentivize hospitals to improve the quality of their care. There is a certain amount of financial risk involved each time a patient is admitted. Many hospitals are given a set amount of money for a specific diagnosis. If patients are discharged early and do well, the hospital can make additional money, if they are discharged and return within a very short amount of time, the readmission is costs will not be paid for by the payer and the hospital will have to absorb the cost. So, there is a lot of incentive to improve quality and to identify high risk patients as all of this translates to lost or gained revenue (8). 

>One quality indicator is patient engagement and satisfaction scores. High patient engagement commonly results in better outcomes (9). Cotiviti’s Patient Engagement solution is Elize, an AI app that combines data analytics and user experience principles, based on empathy and behavioral science to engage patients to encourage them to “inform, remind, and motivate them to act” on prompts. Cotiviti outcomes with the implementation of Eliza have resulted in higher rates of screening for breast cancer, colon cancer and diabetes (10). Quality indicators are also related to reimbursement. Cotiviti has the distinct advantage of 40+ years in the marketplace saving businesses money and helping them to recoop costs from incorrect payments with a loyal business base. They have used their experience with Data Analytics in the payment arena to expanded their business offerings into other areas within Healthcare. 

## Landscape
The top three competitors for Cotiviti in Health Analytics include: IQVIA – rated #1 at (30.09%) market share with 1431 customers in 10 countries, Optum rated #2 at (26.81%) market share with 1275 customers in 10 countries, and Medidata rated at #3 at (19.33%) market share with 919 customers in 10 countries. Cotiviti is rated #11 and has 0.89% of the market with 39 customers in 5 countries (11). 

Artificial Intelligence has been used for more than 60 years in healthcare and in payment analysis solutions. Eliza, the first chatter box was developed at MIT in 1964. Deep Learning and Natural Language Processing, clinical decision support and chatbots have been used for decades with varying degrees of acceptance and shifts on methodologies. Current trends include telemedicine, targeted drug therapies and personalized medicine. Challenges include interoperability between and within Electronic Health Records (EHR), and moral and ethical issues related to biases within the models. The future of AI is both exciting and challenging as we consider the implications of AI supporting clinicians so that they can be more involved in patient interactions, improving clinical workflow. AI can assist with routine work, freeing providers from spending so much time documenting and satisfying billing and administrative needs (12). The freed-up time can be used for improving patient-provider relationships. AI can be used to better understand phenotypes and personalized medicine. Care must be taken to use AI as an assistant and adjunct and not a replacement for provider judgement (12).  

## Recommendations
I would advise Cotiviti to expand their use of Eliza into home health where there are more than 43 million family caregivers in the U.S. This AI tool can be used to help patients and care givers with additional support in the home. For example, the empathetic chatbot could be trained on models of non-pharmacological interventions that can be easily applied by a caregiver for a patient with memory loss who is anxious or upset. It could also track medications taken and remind of medications that needed to be taken. AI can be used to provide emotional and educational support, help with procedures, be a source of guidance and a communication tool between caregivers and with the provider reducing caregiver stress and burnout. These are just a few of the ways that this current tool, Eliza, could be expanded and applied into a setting where there is a tremendous need to support caregiver and patients (14).  This recommendation is consistent with current needs identified in the literature and leverages a successful AI tool they currently have in place; Eliza. 

In conclusion, Cotiviti is a dynamic and upcoming Healthcare and retail payment recovery company with a solid history of excellence and a bright future. 

## Addendum -Sources/References
1.	[Cotiviti](https://www.cotiviti.com/)
2.	[Connolly iHealth Technologies Changes Name to Cotiviti](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20150928005874/en/Connolly-iHealth-Technologies-Changes-Name-to-Cotiviti)
3.	[iHealth Technologies](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/ihealth-technologies) 
4.	[Advent International](https://www.adventinternational.com/investments/case-studies/case-study/?case_study_id=cotiviti)
5.	[Cotiviti Retail](https://retail.cotiviti.com/about) 
6.	[Cotiviti. Webinar: Zero Hour Alerts](https://info.cotiviti.com/webinar/from-recovery-audit-to-preventive-alerts-how-to-stop-margin-loss-at-the-zero-hour) 
7.	[Cotiviti. About](https://www.cotiviti.com/about#) 
8.	[Zimlichman E, Henderson D, Tamir O, et al. Health Care–Associated Infections: A Meta-analysis of Costs and Financial Impact on the US Health Care System. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173(22):2039–2046. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.9763](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/article-abstract/1733452) 
9.	[Marzban S, Najafi M, Agolli A, Ashrafi E. Impact of Patient Engagement on Healthcare Quality: A Scoping Review. Journal of Patient Experience. 2022;9. doi:10.1177/23743735221125439](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/23743735221125439) 
10.	[Cotiviti. Solutions](https://www.cotiviti.com/solutions/consumer-engagement/eliza-member-engagement?utm_source=linkedin&utm_medium=social) 
11.	[6Sense](https://6sense.com/tech/health-analytics/cotiviti-market-share)
12.	[Kulikowski, C. A. (2019). Beginnings of artificial intelligence in medicine (AIM): computational artifice assisting scientific inquiry and clinical art–with reflections on present aim challenges. Yearbook of medical informatics, 28(01), 249-256.](https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/ejournals/html/10.1055/s-0039-1677895) 
13.	[Hirani R, Noruzi K, Khuram H, Hussaini AS, Aifuwa EI, Ely KE, Lewis JM, Gabr AE, Smiley A, Tiwari RK, et al. Artificial Intelligence and Healthcare: A Journey through History, Present Innovations, and Future Possibilities. Life. 2024; 14(5):557. https://doi.org/10.3390/life14050557](https://www.mdpi.com/2075-1729/14/5/557)
14. [Borna S, Maniaci MJ, Haider CR, Gomez-Cabello CA, Pressman SM, Haider SA, Demaerschalk BM, Cowart JB, Forte AJ. Artificial Intelligence Support for Informal Patient Caregivers: A Systematic Review. Bioengineering. 2024; 11(5):483. https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering11050483.](https://www.mdpi.com/2306-5354/11/5/483#) 


[Resource received from Tutoring session](https://medium.com/@saumya.ranjan/how-to-write-a-readme-md-file-markdown-file-20cb7cbcd6f) 



